Well, earthquakes
have been in the news quite a bit recently.
But we’re going to read
about an earthquake in Psalm 46,
which describes one
that has never happened in recorded history
—Psalm 46, starting with verse 1.
It says there:
“God is our refuge and strength,
“a help that is readily found
in times of distress.
“That is why we will not fear,
though the earth undergoes change
“[or, some translations say,
“though the earth quakes”],
“though the mountains topple
into the depths of the sea,
“though its waters roar and foam over,
though the mountains rock
on account of its turbulence.”
Now, there’s no evidence
that this poetic description
of mountains toppling into the sea
literally happened in ancient Israel.
But clearly the world around the psalmist
seemed to be collapsing somehow.
What catastrophic situation
is being referred to?
Well, The Watchtower
has explained that this psalm
seems to fit the time of King Hezekiah
when Jerusalem
was being threatened by Sennacherib,
the king of Assyria.
Now, we know those threats were not empty.
Sennacherib had conquered
surrounding nations.
He had also conquered
the fortified cities around Jerusalem
that were protecting the city.
He’d actually overrun the villages
right up to Nob,
and Nob was within sight of Jerusalem
—one mile (1.5 km) away.
And, as you know,
Assyria was famous for its cruelty.
They’ve found palace walls
from Sennacherib’s time
that show shocking scenes of brutality
toward conquered peoples.
So we can understand why
the psalmist felt the world was collapsing.
The description is so ominous and bleak.
But suddenly, in verse 4,
the tone of the psalm changes completely.
“There is a river the streams of which
“make the city of God rejoice,
“the holy grand tabernacle of the Most High.
“God is in the city; it cannot be overthrown.
God will come to its aid
at the break of dawn.”
So the psalmist’s thoughts
go from catastrophe and chaos
to peace and confidence.
And verse 4 speaks
about “a river” in “the city of God.”
There’s no river flowing in Jerusalem.
So, what is this referring to?
Well, some suggest that it refers
to Hezekiah’s Tunnel,
which was built
in order to bring water into the city.
But the poetic structure of the psalm
actually parallels the river
to the holy tabernacle of Jehovah
—the holy tabernacle of the Most High—
and the pure worship carried on there.
And it’s interesting that when Hezekiah
received the threats from Sennacherib,
the Scriptures say in 2 Kings 19
that Hezekiah
took the letters from the Assyrians,
he went into the temple,
he spread them out before Jehovah,
and he prayed fervently.
And then Jehovah
sent a reassuring message through Isaiah:
“I have heard your prayer to me
concerning King Sennacherib of Assyria. . . .
“He will not come into [the] city
“or shoot an arrow there or [bring] a shield
or . . . siege rampart against it.”
Now, the sons of Korah,
who recorded this psalm,
may have seen Hezekiah going into the temple
and then heard
Jehovah’s response through Isaiah.
And this would give them
complete confidence in the outcome.
And we all know what happened next.
The huge Assyrian army
was vanquished overnight by an angel.
And it could be that verse 5 alludes to this,
where it says: “God will come to its aid
at the break of dawn.”
But what does this psalm teach us?
Well, the psalmist’s example
of focusing on pure worship and His Word,
which is likened to a river in this psalm,
shows that we can experience peace
even when the world around us
seems to be collapsing.
The psalmist declared: “God is in the city.”
He was its Ruler—not Sennacherib!
For decades, Judah had been wayward
and God was not in Jerusalem.
But Hezekiah renovated the temple
and restored pure worship there.
That pure worship
was like a river of blessing
that connected the people to Jehovah
and gave powerful evidence
that God was in the city.
Our Pure Worship  book
associates the river of Psalm 46
with the river that flowed
from Jehovah’s sanctuary in Ezekiel’s vision.
And you might recall that that river
became wider and deeper
the further it flowed.
And the Pure Worship  book says about it:
“Like the visionary river that Ezekiel saw,
the flow of pure truths
has expanded rapidly.”
And today the flow of that river
includes Bibles,
Bible-based publications, and videos
in over a thousand languages.
Ezekiel said that the river got so deep
that a person had to swim.
And for the last five months,
you students have felt like Ezekiel.
Your course has immersed you
and sometimes taken you underwater.
And that was
from the flood of Bible knowledge
you received
through your study, your lectures,
and also the interaction
with the students and your instructors.
And you may have felt
like you were even drowning sometimes.
But like Hezekiah and those with him,
you’ve also been
in the confines of a secure city
where Jehovah’s worship prevails.
During these months,
the world has been dealing
with the aftermath of the pandemic
and wars and other disasters.
But you were like the psalmist:
The earth could quake,
the mountains could topple;
but you enjoyed a special period of peace
because you were focused on that river.
Now you’re going back out into the trenches
with the rest of us, so to speak.
Some of you will serve
where there’s economic turmoil
or violence or other disasters,
or you may personally face health trials,
even persecution.
But the lesson of Gilead
and the lesson of Psalm 46
can serve you well.
When you stay focused on “the river,”
Jehovah’s pure worship,
you can remain confident and joyful
regardless of what challenges life brings.
An ancient Greek writer said:
“No man ever steps in the same river twice.
For it’s not the same river,
and he’s not the same man.”
And isn’t it true that our lives
are constantly changing
and new challenges suddenly crop up?
But Jehovah’s river of blessings
just keeps flowing and is constantly renewed.
It supplies life-giving water
in all circumstances.
And this is so even when
the figurative mountains of this world
are toppling and the world is in chaos.
A sister in the war zone
in eastern Ukraine wrote:
“What we needed most was spiritual food.
“We were overwhelmed with joy
when we received the JW Boxes
“(after the Internet failed)
and spiritual food
“became available again.
“Despite many challenges and difficulties,
“when we meet with fellow believers,
“our problems
are not the main subject of discussion.
“More often, we share
how Jehovah supports us,
what has strengthened us,
and what we’re thankful for.”
We can sense her calmness.
These friends are living examples
of how focusing on “the river”
can preserve our peace
even in times of disaster.
Now, returning to Psalm 46,
we can paraphrase verses 8 and 9,
which may have occurred when the angel
destroyed the Assyrian army.
It says: ‘Jehovah has done
astonishing things on the earth
‘—bringing an end to wars,
breaking the bow and the spear,
and burning the military wagons.’
We can just imagine the astonishing scene:
going out into the Assyrian camp
and seeing the entire army devastated.
Now, what does that mean for us?
Well, we hate the war and violence
that plagues this world
and affects our dear brothers,
and we long for it to end.
But until then, understanding that Jehovah
is still in the city
—still in control of his people—
gives us complete confidence.
No humans, no attack
of an Assyrianlike government,
can stop the flow of that river
or shake the city.
And the psalmist concludes in verse 11
with the reassuring echo of verse 1:
“Jehovah of armies is with us;
the God of Jacob is a secure refuge for us.”
Well, we don’t know what
your individual future holds after Gilead
or what assignments you’ll receive,
but you can be confident
that Jehovah “is in the city.”
He’s in control.
And remember the lesson of Gilead:
Stay focused on “the river”
—the river
that “make[s] the city of God rejoice,”
the river that will flow throughout eternity.